    Title: Hello world!
    Subtitle: Good-bye outsourcing
    Date: 19 Jun 2012
    Status: public
    Tags: life, work

Today is 19 Jun 2012 and this is a big day, because I'm leaving FlatSoft and will
continue my career as independent [web-engineer](/about). I'm also starting this
personal website for tech notes and presentation of my projects.

<img src="/content/articles/helloworld/fs_cup.jpg" align="left" width="300" style="margin: 25px;" />

## Bye FlatSoft

I had been working in FS for 3 years (end 2008 - middle 2012), and those were
great days because I met my love here - NodeJS. And had a great chance to work
on big projects with talented guys. But after 3 years of outsourcing I got
tired. I need a product
- this is why I quit FS and I'm going to start working on a startup. Also I will
continue contibuting my opensource projects (railwayjs, jugglingdb,
jsdoc.info, and others).

## Bye 9 to 5

I believe every good programmer working 9 to 5 should quit some day. Because
real programming is not 9 to 5 - first of all it's love. When you are working on
a project you should think about it as much as it requires: in the shower, while
driving a car, even climbing to Everest or skiing down at 60mph. Life-changing
idea can come at any time and you should be ready to give it all your talent
immediately.

For me it means one project at a time (which is impossible in opensource or
couple part-time jobs, when you spend half of day in one project and half in
another).  This is why I prefer daily contracts rather then hourly. Working
hourly is good enough, but it keeps me in permanent stress -- I should always
remember about my estimations (I'm totally crazy about time and task
estimations). Sometimes I just need to relax and figure out an elegant solution,
but it's almost impossible when you thinking about time restrictions estimated
in paid hours.

And I'm really happy to work without this constraints. And I'm more productive
when I'm happy. As a result we have better solutions, better code and a
satisfied client.

